Vítězslav Novák found substantial sources of inspiration in nature and folk-lore; in this respect, parallels can be drawn between his work and that of Leoš Janáček, despite the later’s generational precedence.
Novák’s affinity to folk tunes resulted to some extent from the influence of his teacher at the Prague conservatory,
Antonín Dvořák though interest in the disappearing world of rural culture was a wide spread phenomenon in turn-of-the-century Bohemia and Moravia.
During is holiday travels, young Novák discovered the charms of Moravia, especially those of the countryside and people of Wallachia (the east-central part). Slovácko (the south-east, locally known as Moravian Slovakia), and the Moravia-Slovakia borderland.
Soon he found himself immersed in collecting folk songs at their source, in the process befriending local singers and musicians, as well as many native Moravian artists linked by well founded empirical knowledge of folk-lore music.
In the period before World War 1, Novák’s way of exploiting the inspirative powers of folk-lore and nature in his own work, was to effect significantly a number of other Czech composers;
this was mainly owing to Novák’s ability to combine his rural inspiration with the postulates of modern art, achieving an admirable integration of folk-lore with assimilated forms of impressionism, symbolism and art nouveau.
Only later did Novák’s influence on Czech music give way to that of Janáček.  END